# Thoughts on political polarisation

I started thinking recently about the two-party political system, particularly in the USA, though Australia also has a fairly binary system (4 minor parties together control less than 4% of seats in the lower house).

I started questioning: why is this two party system stable? Why is it that we don't see more minor parties cropping up and challenging the status quo? Of course, at least in the US, the answer to that is partly in the fact that there's no preferential voting system, so if you vote for a candidate that is unlikely to win, your vote will likely be "wasted", and the major parties put a lot of resources into propagating this story, at least for the candidates that threaten to draw votes away from their own party.

Australia _does_ have a preferential voting system, but still has a very stable two party system, with minor parties only getting a small fraction of the vote. Part of this can be put down to people not understanding the preferential voting system, and still believing their votes will be "wasted", but this still doesn't totally explain why the two party system is such a stable equilibrium. To do that, I think it's instructive to look at physical systems.

In a physical system, a stable equilibrium is one in which the system returns to its initial state even after some perturbation is applied. A canonical example is a cone resting on its base. If we apply a sufficient sideways force to the top of the cone the cone will tip slightly, but then gravity will return it to its original position (assuming the force is insufficient to tip it over).

Physical systems maintain stable equilibrium when there is some negative feedback mechanism that counteracts the destabilising force, bringing the system back to its original state. In the case of the example of the cone above, gravity provides the negative feedback; if the cone is tilted in any direction, gravity pulls it (via leverage) back towards the centre.

There are lots of forces that arise to potentially destabilise the two-party political system, including but not limited to, the populace's deep dissatisfaction with the current political parties and their leaders. One might expect that such dissatisfaction would support the rise of alternative parties that would then grow into major parties themselves, leading to a multi-party system. A natural question that arises then is: what are the feedback mechanisms that resist that destabilising force so effectively?

I believe that one of the main sources of discontent with the political system is a sense that the system does not represent their needs. On an economic level, this manifests as enormous wealth inequality (in the US in 2022, 735 billionaires collectively possessed more wealth than the bottom half of U.S. households). The wealth of the billionaire class does not come entirely from their hard work and ingenuity; indeed much of it comes from existing social infrastructure (eg highways, the internet), and from plundering the social commons (eg the natural environment, the social fabric of society[^1]) over multiple generations.

Given that the US is a democracy, why does the populace not then change the government to address this enormous issue, and redistribute wealth from the rich to the poor? Of course, this is a complex question, with multiple aspects, but I believe that these two questions (ie this one, and the one above about feedback mechanisms) are intimately interrelated. 

The two primary parties in the US (and we see a similar patterns in Australia and the UK) represent (at least on the surface) two different approaches to economics. One party (Democrats in the US, Labour in Australia and the UK) purports to represent wealth redistribution: higher taxes on the rich and corporations, better welfare and education for the poor. The other party (Rebuplicans in the US, Liberals in Australia, Tories in the UK) represent the opposite -- laissez faire economics, free-market capitalism, business-friendly etc.

Of course to frame the two party political system along strictly economic lines is to drastically oversimplify. The other main difference between the two major political parties in the aforementioned countries is along cultural lines. Currently, the party which is more liberal economically (at least in the US, UK, and Australia), tends to be more conservative along social lines. This is not the case everywhere however, and has not always been the case historically in these countries either [citation needed]. The main purpose of this division seems to be to encourage tribal identity. People are more inclined to identify with a group based on moral / social values than along economic lines [citation needed]. Tribal identity allows the incumbent parties to divide the populace and pit them against each other, rather than uniting against the ruling classes. 

This division around tribal identity is a partial answer to why the populace tolerates more wealth inequality than they're overall happy with (ie it distracts them from uniting against a common foe). It doesn't really answer why one of the parties doesn't move more leftward in order to capture more of the vote, and dominate the other party. If neither party will do this, then why doesn't a new party arise on such a platform to take power (at least in countries with preferential voting)? What is the feedback mechanism that keeps this apparently unstable system, stable?

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the answer is... money. The wealthiest 1% and the powerful corporations that they control are deeply financially incentivised to ensure that such wealth redistribution does not occur, whilst maintaining a population that is _satisfied enough_ with the status quo to continue working for them without revolt. The key to this is to provide the illusion of choice (between party A and party B which are painted by the culture wars as being diametrically opposite), and to funnel just enough money into the system (via paying for politicians, eg through campaign financing et al, and through control of the media) to ensure that both parties fundamentally represent the interests of the rich, and that the votes are roughly split between the two parties, such that stability is maintained in perpetuity.

If, for example, the US Democrats were to introduce a policy that radically redistributed wealth from rich to poor, a number of mechanisms would come into effect:
1. Politicians driving such a movement would find themselves defunded, and their hopes of re-election, and all of the benefits of post-political life denied them.
2. Said politicians would be ridiculed in the media, and the media would pivot to more support for the Republican party.
3. There would be more money available from the wealthy and corporations to spend on politics, as their potential losses would have increased. A purely "rational economic actor" will spend 1 billion dollars to make 1 billion and 1 dollars. As such, any losses that are incurred by the policy change are available to fund the opposition. More money would flow to the Republicans, and as such their chances of winning the election would increase. Note that the more radical the wealth distribution, the more money would be available for countering it. In other words, the force to bring the system back into equilibrium is equal to the force applied to take it out of equilibrium -- this is a fundamental property of the feedback mechanisms in stable systems.

Of course, all political players are well aware of these dynamics, so the equilibrium is maintained without need for such drastic measures. Instead, such corrections are subtle and incremental. It's analogous to a well-designed thermostat. If you set the thermostat on your central heating to 20 degrees, the system doesn't wait until the temperature gets to 40 degrees celsius before switching off; it will switch off at 20.1 degrees, or similar. Likewise, the corporations and oligarchs don't need to wait until one of the parties implements a truly radical agenda; the system is efficient enough that even small directional changes in policy will evoke a counterbalancing response [give example].

There are two main ways that a stable equilibrium like the above can be disrupted. One is to apply a massive perturbation — one that's sufficiently large that the system can not recover. In our example of the cone sitting on its base earlier, this would be applying a sufficient force to knock it over. In a political system, this usually looks like revolution of some sort. Because the existing two party political systems in the aforementioned companies is so stable, the magnitude of such a revolution would be enormous, and probably extremely disruptive to society.

A quote by Buckminster Fuller illustrates the alternative:

> You never change things by fighting the existing reality.  
> To change something, build a new model that makes the existing model obsolete.

It's hard to know yet what such an alternative would look like, but this is where we need to be looking.

~~There is another related mechanism at play in this equilibrium, and one which is increasingly pervasive. The two parties in these systems have increasingly aligned themselves along the cultural fault-line that we call the "culture war". This becomes a second-order feedback mechanism, such that the party which is more opposed to wealth distribution (eg Republicans) aligns themselves with cultural issues that disproportionately resonate with the poor. The party that is nominally more supportive of wealth distribution (eg Democrats) aligns themselves with cultural issues that disproportionately resonate with the more "educated" classes. This (alongside propaganda from media that's specifically directed to them) causes the citizens who would most benefit from wealth redistribution to vote against their own economic interests, and to see those who might otherwise be their allies (educated, progressive small-L liberals) as the enemy, and the "elite". It's classic divide-and-conquer strategy.~~



[^1]: See Charles Eisenstein's The Ascent of Humanity for a much more thorough investigation of these ideas.
